          ABIGAIL AND JOHN ADAMS: EXCHANGE OF LETTERS

John Adams (1735-1826) was a leading figure in both the First and Second Continental
Congresses. After the Revolution he served as George Washington’s vice president and
subsequently became the second president of the United States. Abigail Adams (1744-
1818), John’s wife, was a remarkable woman and a talented writer, though nothing she
wrote was ever published. She and John exchanged numerous letters before, during, and
after the Revolutionary War. These two letters were written in the months just prior to the
U.S. Declaration of Independence. At the time, Abigail was caring for their five children at
home in Massachusetts while John was away in Philadelphia at the Continental Congress,
which would issue The Declaration of Independence a few months later.

Letter from Abigail Adams to John Adams, March 31, 1776
I wish you would ever write me a Letter half as long as I write you;
and tell me if you may where your Fleet are gone? What sort of
Defence Virginia can make against our common Enemy? Whether it
is so situated as to make an able Defence?.... I am willing to allow the
Colony great merit for having produced a Washington but they have
been shamefully duped by a Dunmore. I have sometimes been ready to
think that the passion for Liberty cannot be Equally Strong in the
Breasts of those who have been accustomed to deprive their fellow
Creatures of theirs. Of this I am certain that it is not founded upon
that generous and Christian principal of doing to others as we would
that others should do unto us.
….
I long to hear that you have declared an independency -- and by the
way in the new Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for
you to make I desire you would Remember the Ladies, and be more
generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. Do not put
such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands. Remember all
Men would be tyrants if they could. If particular care and attention
is not paid to the Ladies we are determined to foment a Rebellion, and
will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we have no voice,
or Representation. That your Sex are Naturally Tyrannical is a
Truth so thoroughly established as to admit of no dispute, but such of
you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of Master for
the more tender and endearing one of Friend. Why then, not put it
out of the power of the vicious and the Lawless to use us with cruelty
and indignity with impunity. Men of Sense in all Ages abhor those
customs which treat us only as the vassals of your Sex. Regard us then
as Beings placed by providence under your protection and in
imitation of the Supreme Being make use of that power only for our
happiness….
Reply from John Adams to Abigail Adams, April 14, 1776
You justly complain of my short Letters, but the critical State of
Things and the Multiplicity of Avocations must plead my
Excuse. You ask where the Fleet is. The enclosed Papers will
inform you. You ask what Sort of Defence Virginia can make. I
believe they will make an able Defence. Their Militia and
minute Men have been some time employed in training them
selves, and they have Nine Battalions of regulars as they call
them, maintained among them, under good Officers, at the
Continental Expence….

As to Declarations of Independency, be patient. Read our
Privateering Laws, and our Commercial Laws. What signifies a
Word? As to your extraordinary Code of Laws, I cannot but
laugh. We have been told that our Struggle has loosened the
bands of Government everywhere. That Children and
Apprentices were disobedient -- that schools and Colleges were
grown turbulent -- that Indians slighted their Guardians and
Negroes grew insolent to their Masters. But your Letter was the
first Intimation that another Tribe more numerous and
powerful than all the rest were grown discontented. -- This is
rather too coarse a Compliment but you are so saucy, I wont
blot it out.

Depend upon it, We know better than to repeal our Masculine
systems. Although they are in full Force, you know they are
little more than Theory. We dare not exert our Power in its full
Latitude. We are obliged to go fair, and softly, and in Practice
you know We are the subjects. We have only the Name of
Masters, and rather than give up this, which would completely
subject Us to the Despotism of the Petticoat, I hope General
Washington, and all our brave Heroes would fight. I am sure
every good Politician would plot, as long as he would against
Despotism, Empire, Monarchy, Aristocracy, Oligarchy, or
Ochlocracy. -- A fine Story indeed….
