               Sherman Alexie (Spokane_Coeur d'Alene)
                               (1966 - )
Sherman Alexie was born in 1966 in Wellpinit, Washington, on the Spokane Indian
Reservation.1 Born hydrocephalic, Alexie underwent brain surgery at the age of six
months. Although the surgery was successful, he experienced seizures throughout his
childhood. Alexie was a voracious reader, reading Steinbeck by the age of five and
finishing all the books in the Wellpinit library by the age of twelve. Alexie attended
Gonzaga University in Spokane and eventually graduated from Washington State
University with a degree in American Studies. Both of Alexie’s parents were alcoholics
and he battled alcoholism himself throughout his time in college, eventually becoming
sober at the age of twenty-three.

Alexie first encountered contemporary American Indian literature in college. Reading
about his own experiences in poems and stories was a life-changing experience. After
reading this line from a poem by Paiute poet Adrian Louis, “I’m in the reservation of my
mind,” Alexie felt that somebody understood him, and he knew that he would begin
writing. That was in 1989. Since then, he has published nine books of poetry and four
books of fiction and has won numerous awards. Alexie is a significant writer and a
controversial figure, known for his brutally honest depictions of contemporary
reservation life and razor sharp wit. His goal is to challenge and poke fun at traditional
stereotypes, both negative and positive, of American Indian people. The two poems
below offer a very different perspective on the history of Native American and European
American encounters than that suggested by Captain John Smith’s writing.




On the Amtrak from Boston to New York City
The white woman across the aisle from me says 'Look,
look at all the history, that house
on the hill there is over two hundred years old, '
as she points out the window past me

into what she has been taught. I have learned
little more about American history during my few days
back East than what I expected and far less
of what we should all know of the tribal stories

whose architecture is 15,000 years older
than the corners of the house that sits



1Some of this author note has been taken from the note about Alexie in The Heath Anthology of

American Literature.
museumed on the hill. 'Walden Pond, '2
the woman on the train asks, 'Did you see Walden Pond? '

and I don't have a cruel enough heart to break
her own by telling her there are five Walden Ponds
on my little reservation out West
and at least a hundred more surrounding Spokane,

the city I pretended to call my home. 'Listen, '
I could have told her. 'I don't give a shit
about Walden. I know the Indians were living stories
around that pond before Walden's grandparents were born

and before his grandparents' grandparents were born.
I'm tired of hearing about Don-fucking-Henley saving it, too,
because that's redundant.3 If Don Henley's brothers and sisters
and mothers and fathers hadn't come here in the first place

then nothing would need to be saved.'
But I didn't say a word to the woman about Walden
Pond because she smiled so much and seemed so delighted
that I thought to bring her an orange juice

back from the food car. I respect elders
of every color. All I really did was eat
my tasteless sandwich, drink my Diet Pepsi
and nod my head whenever the woman pointed out

another little piece of her country's history
while I, as all Indians have done
since this war began, made plans
for what I would do and say the next time

somebody from the enemy thought I was one of their own.




2
  Walden Pond: Lake near Concord, Massachusetts. Author Henry David Thoreau wrote a
famous nature book in 1854 about his experience living off the land in a small cabin he built next
to Walden Pond.
3
  Don Henley: Co-founder, vocalist, and drummer for The Eagles, Henley founded an
organization to oppose a planned housing development at Walden Pond.
Evolution
Buffalo Bill4 opens a pawn shop on the reservation
right across the border from the liquor store
and he stays open 24 hours a day,7 days a week

and the Indians come running in with jewelry
television sets, a VCR, a full-length beaded buckskin outfit
it took Inez Muse 12 years to finish. Buffalo Bill

takes everything the Indians have to offer, keeps it
all catalogued and filed in a storage room. The Indians
pawn their hands, saving the thumbs for last, they pawn

their skeletons, falling endlessly from the skin
and when the last Indian has pawned everything
but his heart, Buffalo Bill takes that for twenty bucks

closes up the pawn shop, paints a new sign over the old
calls his venture THE MUSEUM OF NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURES
charges the Indians five bucks a head to enter.




4
  Buffalo Bill: Famous nineteenth-century (white) American buffalo hunter who became rich by
designing elaborate shows with “western” themes, which he took on tour throughout America and
Europe. In addition to lots of cowboys, etc., the show also boasted American Indians wearing
traditional regalia as well as participating in a staged attack on a stagecoach.
