                                 Anne Bradstreet (1612-72)

Anne Bradstreet was an early Puritan settler of New England. Bradstreet was a devoted wife,
mother, and church member, as well as a poet whose meditations examined themes of family
life, mortality, and faith in a harsh frontier environment. As she later recalled in a letter to her
children, when she arrived on the coast of Massachusetts after sailing from England, "I found a
new world and new manners, at which my heart rose [in resistance]. But after I was convinced it
was the way of God, I submitted to it and joined the church at Boston." As with other members
of the Puritan faith, Bradstreet believed deeply in unconditional, unquestioning acceptance of
God’s “providence”—that is, the belief that the universe and everything that happens in it have
all been “predestined according to the purpose of Him who worketh all things after the counsel
of His own will (Ephesians 1:11). She also believed that the afterlife, whether heaven or hell,
was of far greater importance than one’s life on earth. Many of her poems, including those about
the deaths of her grandchildren and the burning of her house, show her struggling to reconcile
her deeply held religious beliefs with the equally deep feelings that arise at moments of profound
loss. It is the tension between these two—her religious convictions and the personal emotions
that sometimes threaten to undermine those convictions—that gives these poems their power.
         In 1650, Bradstreet’s brother-in-law conveyed a collection of her hand-written poems to
London, where without consulting her he arranged for a publisher to bring them out as a book
titled The Tenth Muse, Lately Sprung up in America. The Tense Muse was the first published
book of poetry authored by an American.
                                              Anne Bradstreet


The Author to Her Book
Thou ill-form'd offspring of my feeble brain,
Who after birth did'st by my side remain,
Till snatcht from thence by friends, less wise than true,
Who thee abroad expos'd to public view,
Made thee in rags, halting to th' press to trudge,
Where errors were not lessened (all may judge).
At thy return my blushing was not small,
My rambling brat (in print) should mother call.
I cast thee by as one unfit for light,
Thy Visage was so irksome in my sight,
Yet being mine own, at length affection would
Thy blemishes amend, if so I could.
I wash'd thy face, but more defects I saw,
And rubbing off a spot, still made a flaw.
I stretcht thy joints to make thee even feet,1
Yet still thou run'st more hobbling than is meet.
In better dress to trim thee was my mind,
But nought save home-spun Cloth, i' th' house I find.
In this array, 'mongst Vulgars mayst thou roam.
In Critics' hands, beware thou dost not come,
And take thy way where yet thou art not known.
If for thy Father askt, say, thou hadst none;
And for thy Mother, she alas is poor,
Which caus'd her thus to send thee out of door.




1
    Feet: Basic units of meter (regularized rhythm) in poetry.
                                       Anne Bradstreet


  In Memory of My Dear Grandchild Elizabeth Bradstreet, Who
  Deceased August, 1665, Being a Year and Half Old”

  Farewell dear babe, my heart's too much content,
  Farewell sweet babe, the pleasure of mine eye,
  Farewell fair flower that for a space was lent,
  Then ta'en away unto eternity.
  Blest babe, why should I once bewail thy fate,
  Or sigh thy days so soon were terminate,
  Sith2 thou art settled in an everlasting state.

  By nature trees do rot when they are grown,
  And plums and apples thoroughly ripe do fall,
  And corn and grass are in their season mown,
  And time brings down what is both strong and tall.
  But plants new set to be eradicate,
  And buds new blown to have so short a date,
  Is by His hand alone that guides nature and fate.




Verses upon the Burning of Our House, July 10, 1666

In silent night when rest I took,
For sorrow near I did not look,
I wakened was with thund’ring noise
And piteous shrieks of dreadful voice.
That fearful sound of “fire” and “fire,”
Let no man know is my Desire.
I, starting up, the light did spy,
And to my God my heart did cry
To straighten me in my Distress
And not to leave me succourless.
Then, coming out, beheld a space
The flame consume my dwelling place.
And when I could no longer look,
I blest His name that gave and took,


  2 sith: since
                                       Anne Bradstreet

That laid my goods now in the dust.
Yea, so it was, and so ‘twas just.
It was his own, it was not mine,
Far be it that I should repine;
He might of all justly bereft
But yet sufficient for us left.
When by the ruins oft I past
My sorrowing eyes aside did cast
And here and there the places spy
Where oft I sate and long did lie.
Here stood that trunk, and there that chest,
There lay that store I counted best.
My pleasant things in ashes lie
And them behold no more shall I.
Under thy roof no guest shall sit,
Nor at thy Table eat a bit.
No pleasant talk shall ‘ere be told
Nor things recounted done of old.
No Candle e'er shall shine in Thee,
Nor bridegroom‘s voice e'er heard shall be.
In silence ever shalt thou lie,
Adieu, Adieu, all’s vanity.
Then straight I ‘gin my heart to chide,
And did thy wealth on earth abide?
Didst fix thy hope on mould'ring dust?
The arm of flesh didst make thy trust?
Raise up thy thoughts above the sky
That dunghill mists away may fly.
Thou hast a house on high erect
Framed by that mighty Architect,
With glory richly furnished,
Stands permanent though this be fled.
It‘s purchased and paid for too
By Him who hath enough to do.
A price so vast as is unknown,
Yet by His gift is made thine own;
There‘s wealth enough, I need no more,
Farewell, my pelf, farewell, my store.
The world no longer let me love,
My hope and treasure lie above.
                                      Anne Bradstreet



Prologue
To sing of Wars, of Captains, and of Kings,
Of Cities founded, Common-wealths begun,
For my mean Pen are too superior things;
Or how they all, or each their dates have run,
Let Poets and Historians set these forth.
My obscure lines shall not so dim their worth.

But when my wond’ring eyes and envious heart
Great Bartas’ sugar’d lines do but read o’er,
Fool, I do grudge the Muses did not part
‘Twixt him and me that over-fluent store.
A Bartas can do what a Bartas will
But simple I according to my skill.

From School-boy’s tongue no Rhet’ric we expect,
Nor yet a sweet Consort from broken strings,
Nor perfect beauty where’s a main defect.
My foolish, broken, blemished Muse so sings,
And this to mend, alas, no Art is able,
‘Cause Nature made it so irreparable.

Nor can I, like that fluent sweet-tongued Greek
Who lisp’d at first, in future times speak plain.
By Art he gladly found what he did seek,
A full requital of his striving pain.
Art can do much, but this maxim’s most sure:
A weak or wounded brain admits no cure.

I am obnoxious to each carping tongue
Who says my hand a needle better fits.
A Poet’s Pen all scorn I should thus wrong,
For such despite they cast on female wits.
If what I do prove well, it won’t advance,
They’ll say it’s stol’n, or else it was by chance.

But sure the antique Greeks were far more mild,
Else of our Sex, why feigned they those nine
                                    Anne Bradstreet

And poesy made Calliope’s own child?
So ‘mongst the rest they placed the Arts divine,
But this weak knot they will full soon untie.
The Greeks did nought but play the fools and lie.

Let Greeks be Greeks, and Women what they are.
Men have precedency and still excel;
It is but vain unjustly to wage war.
Men can do best, and Women know it well.
Preeminence in all and each is yours;
Yet grant some small acknowledgement of ours.

And oh ye high flown quills that soar the skies,
And ever with your prey still catch your praise,
If e’er you deign these lowly lines your eyes,
Give thyme or Parsley wreath, I ask no Bays.
This mean and unrefined ore of mine
Will make your glist’ring gold but more to shine.
