    Downloaded from https://www.northerncherokeenation.com/the-first-fire.html


                            The First Fire
In the beginning there was no fire, and the world was cold, until the
Thunders (Ani-Hyun tikwala ski), who lived up in Galun lati, sent their
lightning and put fire into the bottom of a hollow sycamore tree which
grew on an island. The animals knew it was there, because they could see
the smoke coming out at the top, but they could not get to it on account
of the water, so they held a council to decide what to do. This was a long
time ago.

Every animal that could fly or swim was anxious to go after the fire. The
Raven offered, and because he was so large and strong they thought he
could surely do the work, so he was sent first. He flew high and far across
the water and alighted on the sycamore tree, but while he was wondering
what to do next, the heat had scorched all his feathers black, and he was
frightened and came back without the fire. The little Screech-owl (Wa
huhu) volunteered to go, and reached the place safely, but while he was
looking down into the hollow tree a blast of hot air came up and nearly
burned out his eyes. He managed to fly home as best he could, but it was
a long time before he could see well, and his eyes are red to this
day. Then the Hooting Owl (U guku) and the Horned Owl (Tskili) went,
but by the time they got to the hollow tree the fire was burning so fiercely
that the smoke nearly blinded them, and the ashes carried up by the wind
made white rings about their eyes. They had to come home again without
the fire, but with all their rubbing they were never able to get rid of the
white rings.

Now no more of the birds would venture, and so the little Uksuhi snake,
the black racer, said he would go through the water and bring back some
fire. He swam across to the island and crawled through the grass to the
tree, and went in by a small hole at the bottom. The heat and smoke were
too much for him, too, and after dodging about blindly over the hot ashes
until he was almost on fire himself he managed by good luck to get out
again at the same hole, but his body had been scorched black, and he has
ever since had the habit of darting and doubling on his track as if trying to
escape from close quarters. He came back, and the great blacksnake,
Gule gi, “The Climber,” offered to go for fire. He swam over to the island
and climbed up the tree on the outside, as the blacksnake always does,
but when he put his head down into the hole the smoke choked him so
that he fell into the burning stump, and before he could climb out again
he was as black as the Uksu hi.

Now they held another council, for still there was no fire, and the world
was cold, but birds, snakes, and four-footed animals, all had some excuse
for not going, because they were all afraid to venture near the burning
sycamore, until at last Kanane ski Amai yehi (the Water Spider) said she
would go. This is not the water spider that looks like a mosquito, but the
other one, with black downy hair and red stripes on her body. She can
run on top of the water or dive to the bottom, so there would be no
trouble to get over to the island, but the question was, How could she
bring back the fire? “I’ll manage that,” said the Water Spider; so she spun
a thread from her body and wove it into a tusti bowl, which she fastened
on her back. Then she crossed over to the island and through the grass to
where the fire was still burning. She put one little coal of fire into her
bowl, and came back with it, and ever since we have had fire, and the
Water Spider still keeps her tusti bowl.

---Excerpt from the book “History, Myths, and Sacred Formulas of the
Cherokees,” transcribed and translated by anthropologist James Mooney
(1900)
