
Emily Dickinson (1830-1886)

Emily Dickinson was born into a well-off family in Amherst, Massachusetts. She attended school from ages 10-17 but remained intensely attached to her home throughout her life, eventually preferring not to leave the house for any reason. But the close friendships Dickinson maintained as well as her voracious reading kept her deeply engaged with the world outside her home. In addition to the Bible and a wide variety of British and American literature, she also read important nineteenth-century intellectual figures such as Charles Darwin, whose emphasis on a random universe marked by unceasing conflict represented a controversial challenge to the Christian belief system in which she had been raised. 

Dickinson’s teenage years coincided with a wave of evangelical religious revivals that swept through New England. A number of her relatives, friends, and schoolmates testified in church to having undergone born-again experiences in which they accepted their own sinfulness and were saved by a personal experience of God’s grace. Although she could not help but be partially caught up by the religious fervor around her, Dickinson never professed to be born again and eventually decided to stop attending church altogether. In an 1860 poem, she noted that while “Some keep the Sabbath going to Church,” she preferred to keep it at home in her garden, a place that yielded her not only pleasure but also the opportunity to observe and think carefully about nature and its processes. Indeed, for the Transcendentalist writers who were Dickinson’s prominent New England contemporaries, natural facts were often symbolic of larger spiritual truths. Over the course of her life Dickinson wrote nearly eighteen hundred poems, most of which were discovered only after her death. Her poems are noted for their intensity of vision and their frequently unconventional use of language and other formal elements.


Some keep the Sabbath going to Church –
Some keep the Sabbath going to Church –
I keep it, staying at Home –
With a Bobolink for a Chorister –
And an Orchard, for a Dome –

Some keep the Sabbath in Surplice –
I, just wear my Wings –
And instead of tolling the Bell, for Church,
Our little Sexton – sings.

God preaches, a noted Clergyman –
And the sermon is never long,
So instead of getting to Heaven, at last –
I’m going, all along.

Apparently with no surprise
Apparently with no surpriseTo any happy Flower The Frost beheads it at its play--In accidental power--The blond Assassin passes on--The Sun proceeds unmovedTo measure off another DayFor an Approving God.


Tell all the truth but tell it slantTell all the truth but tell it slant,Success in circuit lies,Too bright for our infirm delightThe truth's superb surprise; As lightning to the children easedWith explanation kind,The truth must dazzle graduallyOr every man be blind. 


Wild nights - Wild nights!
Wild nights - Wild nights!
Were I with thee
Wild nights should be
Our luxury!

Futile - the winds -
To a Heart in port -
Done with the Compass -
Done with the Chart!

Rowing in Eden -
Ah - the Sea!
Might I but moor - tonight -
In thee!

One need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted— 
One need not be a Chamber—to be Haunted— One need not be a House— The Brain has Corridors—surpassing Material Place—
Far safer, of a Midnight Meeting External Ghost Than its interior Confronting— That Cooler Host.
Far safer, through an Abbey gallop, The Stones a'chase— Than Unarmed, one's a'self encounter— In lonesome Place—
Ourself behind ourself, concealed— Should startle most— Assassin hid in our Apartment Be Horror's least.
The Body—borrows a Revolver— He bolts the Door— O'erlooking a superior spectre— Or More—




He fumbles at your Soul
He fumbles at your SoulAs Players at the KeysBefore they drop full Music on-He stuns you by degrees-Prepares your brittle NatureFor the Ethereal BlowBy fainter Hammers-further heard-Then nearer-Then so slowYour Breath has time to straighten-Your Brain-to bubble Cool-Deals-One-imperial-Thunderbolt-That scalps your naked Soul-
When Winds take Forests in their Paws-The Universe-is still-
It was not Death, for I stood up
It was not Death, for I stood up,
And all the Dead, lie down -
It was not Night, for all the Bells
Put out their Tongues, for Noon.

It was not Frost, for on my Flesh
I felt Siroccos - crawl -
Nor Fire - for just my marble feet
Could keep a Chancel, cool -

And yet, it tasted, like them all,
The Figures I have seen
Set orderly, for Burial
Reminded me, of mine -

As if my life were shaven,
And fitted to a frame,
And could not breathe without a key,
And ’twas like Midnight, some -

When everything that ticked - has stopped -
And space stares - all around -
Or Grisly frosts - first Autumn morns,
Repeal the Beating Ground -

But most, like Chaos - Stopless - cool -
Without a Chance, or spar -
Or even a Report of Land -
To justify - Despair.


Split the Lark
Split the Lark—and you'll find the Music— 
Bulb after Bulb, in Silver rolled— 
Scantily dealt to the Summer Morning 
Saved for your Ear when Lutes be old.  

Loose the Flood—you shall find it patent— 
Gush after Gush, reserved for you— 
Scarlet Experiment! Sceptic Thomas! 
Now, do you doubt that your Bird was true?
If I shouldn't be alive
If I shouldn't be alive
When the Robins come,
Give the one in Red Cravat,
A Memorial crumb.

If I couldn't thank you,
Being fast asleep,
You will know I'm trying
With my Granite lip!
My Life had stood - a Loaded Gun –
My Life had stood - a Loaded Gun -
In Corners - till a Day
The Owner passed - identified -
And carried Me away -

And now We roam in Sovereign Woods -
And now We hunt the Doe -
And every time I speak for Him
The Mountains straight reply -

And do I smile, such cordial light
Opon the Valley glow -
It is as a Vesuvian face
Had let it’s pleasure through -

And when at Night - Our good Day done -
I guard My Master’s Head -
’Tis better than the Eider Duck’s
Deep Pillow - to have shared -

To foe of His - I’m deadly foe -
None stir the second time -
On whom I lay a Yellow Eye -
Or an emphatic Thumb -

Though I than He - may longer live
He longer must - than I -
For I have but the power to kill,
Without - the power to die -

She sweeps with many-colored broomsShe sweeps with many-colored brooms, And leaves the shreds behind; Oh, housewife in the evening west, Come back, and dust the pond!
You dropped a purple ravelling in, You dropped an amber thread; And now you've littered all the East With duds of emerald!
And still she plies her spotted brooms, And still the aprons fly, Till brooms fade softly into starsAnd then I come away.

I felt a Funeral, in my Brain
I felt a Funeral, in my Brain,
And Mourners to and fro
Kept treading - treading - till it seemed
That Sense was breaking through -

And when they all were seated,
A Service, like a Drum -
Kept beating - beating - till I thought
My mind was going numb -

And then I heard them lift a Box
And creak across my Soul
With those same Boots of Lead, again,
Then Space - began to toll,

As all the Heavens were a Bell,
And Being, but an Ear,
And I, and Silence, some strange Race,
Wrecked, solitary, here -

And then a Plank in Reason, broke,
And I dropped down, and down -
And hit a World, at every plunge,
And Finished knowing - then -


She dealt her pretty words like Blades—She dealt her pretty words like Blades—How glittering they shone—And every One unbared a NerveOr wantoned with a Bone—She never deemed—she hurt—That—is not Steel's Affair—A vulgar grimace in the Flesh—How ill the Creatures bear—To Ache is human—not polite—The Film upon the eyeMortality's old Custom—Just locking up—to Die. 


																I measure every Grief I meet 
																I measure every Grief I meet 
																With narrow, probing, eyes –  
																I wonder if It weighs like Mine –  
																Or has an Easier size.  
																
																I wonder if They bore it long –  
																Or did it just begin –  
																I could not tell the Date of Mine –  
																It feels so old a pain –   
																
																I wonder if it hurts to live –  
																And if They have to try –  
																And whether – could They choose between –  
																It would not be – to die –  
																 
																I note that Some – gone patient long –  
																At length, renew their smile –   
																An imitation of a Light 
																That has so little Oil –   
																
																I wonder if when Years have piled –   
																Some Thousands – on the Harm –   
																That hurt them early – such a lapse 
																Could give them any Balm –    
																
																Or would they go on aching still 
																Through Centuries of Nerve –  
																Enlightened to a larger Pain –   
																In Contrast with the Love –    
																
																The Grieved – are many – I am told –   
																There is the various Cause –   
																Death – is but one – and comes but once –   
																And only nails the eyes –    
																
																There's Grief of Want – and grief of Cold –   
																A sort they call "Despair" –   
																There's Banishment from native Eyes –  
																In sight of Native Air –    
																
																And though I may not guess the kind –   
																Correctly – yet to me 
																A piercing Comfort it affords 
																In passing Calvary –    
																
																To note the fashions – of the Cross –   
																And how they're mostly worn –   
																Still fascinated to presume 
																That Some – are like my own – 
																

