                        HOW AMERICA WAS DISCOVERED

According to Chief Cornplanter, Handsome Lake (1735-1815) taught that America was
discovered in the manner here related.

A great queen had among her servants a young minister. Upon a certain occasion she requested
him to dust some books that she had hidden in an old chest. Now when the young man reached
the bottom of the chest he found a wonderful book which he opened and read. It told that the
white men had killed the son of the Creator and it said, moreover, that he had promised to return
in three days and then again forty but that he never did. All his followers then began to despair
but some said, "He surely will come again some time." When the young preacher read this book
he was worried because he had discovered that he had been deceived and that his Lord was not
on earth and had not returned when he promised. So he went to some of the chief preachers and
asked them about the matter and they answered that he had better seek the Lord himself and find
if he were not on the earth now.

So he prepared to find the Lord and the next day when he looked out into the river he saw a
beautiful island and marveled that he had never noticed it before. As he continued to look he saw
a castle built of gold in the midst of the island and he marveled that he had not seen the castle
before. Then he thought that so beautiful a palace on so beautiful an isle must surely be the
abode of the son of the Creator. Immediately he went to the wise men and told them what he had
seen and they wondered greatly and answered that it must indeed be the house of the Lord. So
together they went to the river and when they came to it they found that it was spanned by a
bridge of gold. Then one of the preachers fell down and prayed a long time and arising to cross
the bridge turned back because he was afraid to meet his Lord. Then the other crossed the bridge
and knelt down upon the grass and prayed but he became afraid to go near the house. So the
young man went boldly over to attend to the business at hand and walking up to the door
knocked.

A handsome man welcomed him into a room and bade him be of ease. "I wanted you," he said.
"You are bright young man; those old fools will not suit me for they would be afraid to listen to
me. Listen to me, young man, and you will be rich. Across the ocean there is a great country of
which you have never heard. The people there are virtuous, they have no evil habits or appetites
but are honest and single-minded. A great reward is yours if you enter into my plans and carry
them out. Here are five things. Carry them over to the people across the ocean and never shall
you want for wealth, position or power. Take these cards, this money, this fiddle, this whiskey
and this blood corruption and give them all to the people across the water. The cards will make
them gamble away their goods and idle away their time, the money will make them dishonest
and covetous, the fiddle will make them dance with women and their lower natures will
command them, the whiskey will excite their minds to evil doing and turn their minds, and the
blood corruption will eat their strength and rot their bones."

The young man thought this a good bargain and promised to do as the man had commanded him.
He left the palace and when he had stepped over the bridge it was gone, likewise the golden
palace and also the island. Now he wondered if he had seen the Lord but he did not tell the great
ministers of his bargain because they might try to forstall him. So he looked about and at length
found Columbus to whom he told the whole story. So Columbus fitted out some boats and sailed
out into the ocean to find the land on the other side. When he had sailed for many days on the
water the sailors said that unless Columbus turned about and went home they would behead him
but he asked for another day and on that day land was seen and that land was America. Then they
turned around and going back reported what they had discovered. Soon a great flock of ships
came over the ocean and white men came swarming into the country bringing with them cards,
money, fiddles, whiskey and blood corruption.

Now the man who had appeared in the gold palace was the devil and when afterward he saw
what his words had done he said that he had made a great mistake and even he lamented that his
evil had been so enormous.

Translated and recorded by folklorist and archeologist Arthur C. Parker in 1923 (One-fourth
Seneca, Parker was descended from Handsome Lake through his paternal grandmother)
