“Two great stones were brought before Powhatan: then as many as could laid hands on him,
dragged him to them, and thereon laid his head, and being ready with their clubs, to beat out his
brains. Pocahontas the Kings dearest daughter, when no entreaty could prevail, got his head in
her armes, and laid her own upon his to save him from death: whereat the Emperour was
contented he should live.”




                         Excerpt from:
 John Smith, The General History of Virginia, New England, and the
                      Summer Isles (1624)
Note: English spelling in the seventeenth century was flexible…

      The next voyage he proceeded so far that with much labour by cutting of trees in sunder he
made his passage, but when his Barge could passe no farther, he left her in a broad bay out of
danger of shot, commanding none should go ashore till his return: himself with two English and
two Salvages went up higher in a Canoe, but he was not long absent, but his men went ashore,
whose want of government, gave both occasion and opportunity to the Salvages to surprise one
George Cassen, whom they slew, and much failed not to have cut of the boat and all the rest.
Smith little dreaming of that accident, being got to the marshes at the rivers head, twenty miles in
the desert, had his two men slain (as is supposed) sleeping by the Canoe, whilst himself by
fowling sought them victual, who finding he was beset with 200 Savages, two of them he slew,
still defending himself with the ayd of a Salvage his guid, whom he bound to his arme with his
garters, and used him as a buckler, yet he was shot in his thigh a little, and had many arrowes
that stucke in his cloathes but no great hurt, till at last they tooke him prisoner. When this newes
came to James towne, much was their sorrow for his losse, fewe expecting what ensued. Sixe or
seven weekes those Barbarians kept him prisoner, many strange triumphes and conjurations they
made of him, yet he so demeaned himself amongst them, as he not onely diverted them from
surprising the Fort, but procured his owne libertie, and got himself and his company such
estimation amongst them, that those Salvages admired him more then their owne
Quiyouckosucks. The manner how they used and delivered him is as followeth.

                                  Captaine Smith taken prisoner.

      The Salvages having drawne from George Cassen whether Captaine Smith was gone,
prosecuting that opportunity they followed him with 300. bowmen, conducted by the King of
Pamaunkee, who in divisions searching the turnings of the river, found Robinson and Emry by
the fire side; those they shot full of arrowes and slew. Then finding the Captaine, as is said, that
used the Salvage that was his guide as his shield (three of them being slaine and divers other so
gauld) all the rest would not come neere him. Thinking thus to have returned to his boat,
regarding them, as he marched, more then his way, slipped up to the middle in an oasie creeke &
his Salvage with him, yet durst they not come to him till, being neere dead with cold, he threw
away his armes. Then according to their composition they drew him forth and led him to the fire,
where his men were slaine. [III. 47.] Diligently they chafed his benummed limbs. He demanding
for their Captaine, they shewed him Opechankanough, King of Pamaunkee, to whom he gave a
round Ivory double compass Dyall. Much they marvailed at the playing of the Fly and Needle,
which they could see so plainely, and yet not touch it, because of the glasse that covered them.
But when he demonstrated by that Globe-like Jewell, the roundnesse of the earth, and skies, the
spheare of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, and how the Sunne did chase the night round about
the world continually; the greatnesse of the Land and Sea, the diversitie of Nations, varietie of
complexions, and how we were to them Antipodes, and many other such like matters, they all
stood as amazed with admiration. Notwithstanding, within an houre after they tyed him to a tree,
and as many as could stand about him prepared to shoot him, but the King holding up the
Compass in his hand, they all laid downe their Bowes and Arrowes, and in a triumphant manner
led him to Orapaks, where he was after their manner kindly feasted, and well used.

                            The order they observed in their triumph.

      Their order in conducting him was thus; Drawing themselves all in fyle, the King in the
middest had all their Peeces and swords borne before him. Captaine Smith was led after him by
three great Salvages, holding him fast by each arme: and on each side six went in fyle with their
Arrowes nocked. But arriving at the Towne (which was but onely thirtie or fortie hunting houses
made of Mats, which they remove as they please, as we our tents) all the women and children
staring to behold him, the souldiers first all in fyle performed the forme of a Bissom so well as
could be, and on each flanke, officers as Serjeants to see them keepe their orders. A good time
they continued this exercise, and then cast themselves in a ring, dauncing in such severall
Postures, and singing and yelling out such hellish notes and screeches; being strangely painted,
every one his quiver of Arrowes, and at his backe a club; on his arme a Fox or an Otters skinne,
or some such matter for his vambrace; their heads and shoulders painted red, with Oyle and
Pocones mingled together, which Scarlet-like colour made an exceeding handsome shew; his
Bow in his hand, and the skinne of a Bird with her wings abroad dryed, tyed on his head, a peece
of copper, a white shell, a long feather, with a small rattle growing at the tayles of their snaks
tyed to it, or some such like toy. All this while Smith and the King stood in the middest guarded,
as before is said, and after three dances they all departed. Smith they conducted to a long house,
where thirtie or fortie tall fellowes did guard him, and ere long more bread and venison was
brought him then would have served twentie men, I thinke his stomacke at that time was not very
good; what he left they put in baskets and tyed over his head. About midnight they set the meate
againe before him, all this time not one of them would eate a bit with him, till the next morning
they brought him as much more, and then did they eate all the old, & reserved the new as they
had done the other, which made him thinke they would fat him to eat him. Yet in this desperate
estate to defend him from the cold, one Maocassater brought him his gowne, in requitall of some
beads and toyes Smith had given him at his first arrivall in Virginia.

                          How he should have been slaine at Orapacks.
      Two dayes after a man would have slaine him (but that the guard prevented it) for the death
of his sonne, to whom they conducted him to recover the poore man then breathing his last.
Smith told them that at James towne he had a water would doe it, if they would let him fetch it,
but they would not permit that; but made all the preparations they could to assault James towne,
craving his advice, and for recompence he should have life, libertie, land, and women. In part of
a Table booke he writ his minde to them at the Fort, what was intended, how they should follow
that direction to affright the messengers, and without fayle send him such things as he writ for.
And an Inventory with them. The difficultie and danger, he told the Salvages, of the Mines,
great-gunnes, and other Engins exceedingly affrighted them, yet according to his request they
went to James towne, in as bitter weather as could be of frost and snow, and within three dayes
returned with an answer.

                         How he saved James towne from being surprised.
                         How they did Conjure him at Pamuankee. {MN}

      But when they came to James towne, seeing men sally out as he had told them they would,
they fled; yet in the night they came againe to the same place where he had told them they should
receive an answer, and such things [III.48] as he had promised them, which they found
accordingly, and with which they returned with no small expedition, to the wonder of them all
that heard it, that he could either divine, or the paper could speake: then they led him to the
Youthtanunds, the Mattapanients, the Payankatanks, the Nantaughtacunds, and Onawmanients
upon the rivers of Raphanock, and Patawomek, over all those rivers, and backe againe by divers
other severall Nations, to the Kings habitation at Pamaunkee, {MN} where they entertained him
with most strange and fearefulle Conjurations.

     As if neare led to hell, Amongst the Devils to dwell.

      Not long after, early in a morning a great fire was made in a long house, and a mat spread
on the one side, as on the other; on the one they caused him to sit, and all the guard went out of
the house, and presently came skipping in a great grim fellow, all painted over with coale,
mingled with oyle; and many Snakes and Wesels skins stuffed with mosse, and all their tayles
tyed together, so as they met on the crowne of his head in a tassell; and round about the tassell
was as a Coronet of feathers, the skins hanging round about his head, backe, and shoulders, and
in a manner covered his face; with a hellish voyce and a rattle in his hand. With most strange
gestures and passions he began his invocation, and environed the fire with a circle of meale;
which done, three more such like devils came rushing in with the like antique tricks, painted
halfe blacke, half red: but all their eyes were painted white, and some red stroakes like
Mutchato's, along their cheekes: round about him those fiends daunced a pretty while, and then
came in three more as ugly as the rest; with red eyes, and white stroakes over their blacke faces,
at last they all sat downe right against him; three of them on the one hand of the chiefe Priest,
and three on the other. Then all with their rattles began a song, which ended, the chiefe Priest
layd downe five wheat cornes: then strayning his armes and hands with such violence that he
sweat, and his veynes swelled, he began a short Oration: at the conclusion they all gave a short
groane; and then layd down three graines more. After that, began their song againe, and then
another Oration, ever laying downe so many cornes as before, till they had twice incirculed the
fire; that done, they tooke a bunch of little stickes prepared for that purpose, continuing still their
devotion, and at the end of every song and Oration, they layd downe a sticke betwixt the
divisions of Corne. Till night, neither he nor they did either eate or drinke, and then they feasted
merrily, with the best provisions they could make. Three dayes they used this Ceremony; the
meaning whereof they told him was to know if he intended them well or no. The circle of meale
signified their Country, the circles of corne the bounds of the Sea, and the stickes his Country.
They imagined the world to be flat and round, like a trencher, and they in the middest. After this
they brought him a bagge of gunpowder, which they carefully preserved till the next spring, to
plant as they did their corne; because they would be acquainted with the nature of that seede.

     Opitchapam the Kings brother invited him to his house, where, with as many platters of
bread, foule, and wild beasts; as did environ him, he bid him wellcome; but not any of them
would eate a bit with him, but put up all the remainder in Baskets. At his returne to
Opechancanoughs, all the Kings women, and their children, flocked about him for their parts, as
a due by Custome, to be merry with such fragments.

     But his waking mind in hydeous dreames did oft see wondrous shapes, Of bodies strange,
     and huge in growth, and of stupendious makes.



                                How Powhatan entertained him.
                              How Pocahontas saved his life {MN}

      At last they brought him to Meronocomo, where was Powhatan their Emperor. Here more
then two hundred of those grim Courtiers stood wondering at him, as he had beene a monster; till
Powhatan and his trayne had put themselves in their greatest braveries. Before a fire upon a seat
like a bedsted, he sat covered with a great robe, made of Rarowcun skinnes, and all the tayles
hanging by. On either hand did sit a young wench of 16 or 18 yeares, and along on each side the
house, two rowes of [III.49] men, and behind them as many women, with all their heads and
shoulders painted red; many of their heads bedecked with the white downe of Birds; but every
one with something: and a great chayne of white beads about their necks. At his entrance before
the King, all the people gave a great shout. The Queene of Appamatuck was appointed to bring
him water to wash his hands, and another brought him a bunch of feathers, in stead of a Towell
to dry them; having feasted him after their best barbarous manner they could, a long consultation
was held, but the conclusion was, two great stones were brought before Powhatan: then as many
as could layd hands on him, dragged him to them, and thereon laid his head, and being ready
with their clubs, to beate out his braines, {MN} Pocahontas the Kings dearest daughter, when no
intreaty could prevaile, got his head in her armes, and laid her owne upon his to save him from
death: whereat the Emperour was contented he should live to make him hatchets, and her bells,
beads, and copper; for they thought him as well of all occupations as themselves. For the King
himself will make his owne robes, shooes, bowes, arrowes, pots; plant, hunt, or doe any thing so
well as the rest.

     They say he bore a pleasant shew, But sure his heart was sad. For who can pleasant be, and
     rest, That lives in feare and dread: And having life suspected, doth It still suspected lead.
                      How Powhatan sent him to James Towne. {MN-1}
                      The third project to abandon the Countrey. {MN-2}

      Two dayes after, Powhatan having disguised himself in the most fearefull manner he could,
caused Capt. Smith to be brought forth to a great house in the woods, and there upon a mat by
the fire to be left alone. {MN-1} Not long after from behinde a mat that divided the house, was
made the most dolefullest noyse he ever heard; then Powhatan more like a devill then a man with
some two hundred more as blacke as himself, came unto him and told him now they were
friends, and presently he should goe to James towne, to send him two great gunnes, and a grynd-
stone, for which he would give him the Country of Capahowosick, and for ever esteeme him as
his sonne Nantaquoud. So to James towne with 12 guides Powhatan sent him. That night they
quarterd in the woods, he still expecting (as he had done all this long time of his imprisonment)
every houre to be put to one death or other: for all their feasting. But almightie God (by his
divine providence) had mollified the hearts of those sterne Barbarians with compassion. The next
morning betimes they came to the Fort, where Smith having used the Salvages with what
kindnesse he could, he shewed Rawhunt, Powhatans trusty servant two demi-Culverings & a
millstone to carry Powhatan: they found them some-what too heavie; but when they did see him
discharge them, being loaded with stones, among the boughs of a great tree loaded with Isickles,
the yce and branches came so tumbling downe, that the poore Salvages ran away halfe dead with
feare. But at last we regained some conference with them, and gave them such toyes; and sent to
Powhatan, his women, and children such presents, as gave them in generall full content. {MN-2}
