Engaging with a diverse range of authors and voices, this surveys US-American literature from Indigenous creation stories and early colonial encounters up to our own historical moment. Throughout the term, we will work to hone skills of close reading, contextual analysis, and critical thinking. We will explore how the literary works we read relate both to their own time and to ours. Among the many questions we will address are: How have shifting cultural ideas about femininity and masculinity influenced the development of American literature? What new literary forms did enslaved people’s resistance to their enslavement produce? What can literature teach us about illness, health, and health care? More broadly, what do the works we read this term communicate about the values and choices of diverse people and groups living in social and historical contexts that differ from our own?

REQUIRED TEXTS

The pdf provided to you
Benjamin Franklin, The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (1791). 
Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave(1845). 

Kate Chopin, The Awakening(1899). (Read only The Awakening, not the additional short stories included in the etext…unless you want to.)

LEARNING OUTCOMES AND CAREER READINESS COMPETENCIES

Within the discipline of literary studies, the learning outcomes of this course are (1) deepen your knowledge and appreciation of major writers, works, trends, and issues in the history of American literature and (2) sharpen your skills of observation, analysis, and critical expression.

The skills and competencies you hone in E316M, however, will be valuable throughout your career in many different ways, including those listed below:

Critical Thinking: Identify and respond to challenges based upon your ability to grasp significant details, to perform logical analysis, and to understand the relevance of both immediate and longer-term contexts. 

Communication: Clearly and effectively exchange information, ideas, facts, and perspectives with colleagues and others.

COURSE NUTS AND BOLTS

The guiding educational premise of this course draws from abundant research on how learning works in higher education contexts. Here’s the short version: skills and knowledge that students acquire through active learning are internalized more deeply, last longer, and transfer to other contexts more effectively than skills and knowledge transmitted solely through lectures.

