https://www.nps.gov/jame/learn/historyculture/pocahontas-her-life-and-legend.htm
                                                                                                   2




Pocahontas: Her Life and Legend
Not much is known about this memorable woman. What we do know was written by others, as
none of her thoughts or feelings were ever recorded. Specifically, her story has been told through
written historical accounts and, most recently, through the sacred oral history of the Mattaponi.
Most notably, Pocahontas has left an indelible impression that has endured for more than 400
years. And yet, many people who know her name do not know much about her.

…..

The recently published (2007) The True Story of Pocahontas: The Other Side of History by Dr.
Linwood "Little Bear" Custalow and Angela L. Daniel "Silver Star," based on the sacred oral
history of the Mattaponi tribe, offers some further, and sometimes very different, insights into
the real Pocahontas.

Pocahontas was the last child of Wahunsenaca (Chief Powhatan) and his first wife Pocahontas,
his wife of choice and of love. Pocahontas' mother died during childbirth. Their daughter was
given the name Matoaka which meant "flower between two streams." The name probably came
from the fact that the Mattaponi village was located between the Mattaponi and Pamunkey
Rivers and that her mother was Mattaponi and her father Pamunkey.

Wahunsenaca was devastated by the loss of his wife, but found joy in his daughter. He often
called her Pocahontas, which meant "laughing and joyous one," since she reminded him of his
beloved wife. There was no question that she was his favorite and that the two had a special
bond. Even so, Wahunsenaca thought it best to send her to be raised in the Mattaponi village
rather than at his capital of Werowocomoco. She was raised by her aunts and cousins, who took
care of her as if she were their own.

Once Pocahontas was weaned, she returned to live with her father at Werowocomoco.
Wahunsenaca had other children with Pocahontas' mother as well as with his alliance wives, but
Pocahontas held a special place in her father's heart. Pocahontas held a special love and respect
for her father as well. All of the actions of Pocahontas or her father were motivated by their deep
love for each other, their deep and strong bond. The love and bond between them never wavered.
Most of her older siblings were grown, as Wahunsenaca fathered Pocahontas later in his life.
Many of her brothers and sisters held prominent positions within Powhatan society. Her family
was very protective of her and saw to it that she was well looked after.

As a child, Pocahontas' life was very different than as an adult. The distinction between
childhood and adulthood was visible through physical appearance as well as through behavior.
Pocahontas would not have cut her hair or worn clothing until she came of age (in winter she
wore a covering to protect against the cold). There were also certain ceremonies she was not
allowed to participate in or even witness. Even as a child, the cultural standards of Powhatan
society applied to her, and in fact, as the daughter of the paramount chief, more responsibility
                                                                                                    3


and discipline were expected of her. Pocahontas also received more supervision and training; as
Wahunsenaca's favorite daughter she probably had even more security, as well.

When the English arrived, the Powhatan people welcomed them. They desired to become friends
and trade with the settlers. Each tribe within the Powhatan Chiefdom had quiakros (priests), who
were spiritual leaders, political advisors, medical doctors, historians and enforcers of Powhatan
behavioral norms. The quiakros advised containing the English and making them allies to the
Powhatan people. Wahunsenaca agreed with the quiakros. During the winter of 1607 the
friendship was solidified.




                                                             Captain John Smith statue at Historic
Jamestowne.
Sarah J Stebbins
The most famous event of Pocahontas' life, her rescue of Captain John Smith, did not happen the
way he wrote it. Smith was exploring when he encountered a Powhatan hunting party. A fight
ensued, and Smith was captured by Opechancanough. Opechancanough, a younger brother of
Wahunsenaca, took Smith from village to village to demonstrate to the Powhatan people that
Smith, in particular, and the English, in general, were as human as they were. The "rescue" was a
ceremony, initiating Smith as another chief. It was a way to welcome Smith, and, by extension,
all the English, into the Powhatan nation. It was an important ceremony, so the quiakros would
have played an integral role.

Wahunsenaca truly liked Smith. He even offered a healthier location for the English,
Capahowasick (east of Werowocomoco). Smith's life was never in danger. As for Pocahontas,
she would not have been present, as children were not allowed at religious rituals. Afterwards,
Pocahontas would have considered Smith a leader and defender of the Powhatan people, as an
allied chief of the English tribe. She would have expected Smith to be loyal to her people, since
he had pledged friendship to Wahunsenaca. In Powhatan society, one's word was one's bond.
That bond was sacred.

The English had been welcomed by the Powhatan people. To cement this new alliance,
Wahunsenaca sent food to Jamestown during the winter of 1607-08. Doing so was the Powhatan
                                                                                                 4


way, as leaders acted for the good of the whole tribe. It was during these visits to the fort with
food that Pocahontas became known to the English, as a symbol of peace. Since she was still a
child, she would not have been allowed to travel alone or without adequate protection and
permission from her father. The tight security that surrounded Pocahontas at Jamestown, though
often disguised, may have been how the English realized she was Wahunsenaca's favorite.

Over time, relations between the Powhatan Indians and the English began to deteriorate. The
settlers were aggressively demanding food that, due to summer droughts, could not be provided.
In January 1609, Captain John Smith paid an uninvited visit to Werowocomoco. Wahunsenaca
reprimanded Smith for English conduct, in general, and for Smith's own, in particular. He also
expressed his desire for peace with the English. Wahunsenaca followed the Powhatan
philosophy of gaining more through peaceful and respectful means than through war and force.
According to Smith, during this visit Pocahontas again saved his life by running through the
woods that night to warn him her father intended to kill him. However, as in 1607, Smith's life
was not in danger. Pocahontas was still a child, and a very well protected and supervised one; it
is unlikely she would have been able to provide such a warning. It would have gone against
Powhatan cultural standards for children. If Wahunsenaca truly intended to kill Smith,
Pocahontas could not have gotten past Smith's guards, let alone prevented his death.


As relations continued to worsen between the two peoples, Pocahontas stopped visiting, but the
English did not forget her. Pocahontas had her coming of age ceremony, which symbolized that
she was eligible for courtship and marriage. This ceremony took place annually and boys and
girls aged twelve to fourteen took part. Pocahontas' coming of age ceremony (called
a huskanasquaw for girls) took place once she began to show signs of womanhood. Since her
mother was dead, her older sister Mattachanna oversaw the huskanasquaw, during which
Wahunsenaca's daughter officially changed her name to Pocahontas. The ceremony itself was
performed discreetly and more secretly than usual because the quiakros had heard rumors the
English planned to kidnap Pocahontas.

After the ceremony a powwow was held in celebration and thanksgiving. During the powwow, a
courtship dance allowed single male warriors to search for a mate. It was most likely during this
dance that Pocahontas met Kocoum. After a courtship period, the two married. Wahunsenaca
was happy with Pocahontas' choice, as Kocoum was not only the brother of a close friend of his,
Chief Japazaw (also called Iopassus) of the Potowomac (Patawomeck) tribe, but was also one of
his finest warriors. He knew Pocahontas would be well protected.

Rumors of the English wanting to kidnap Pocahontas resurfaced, so she and Kocoum moved to
his home village. While there, Pocahontas gave birth to a son. Then, in 1613, the long suspected
English plan to kidnap Pocahontas was carried out. Captain Samuel Argall demanded the help of
Chief Japazaw. A council was held with the quiakros, while word was sent to Wahunsenaca.
Japazaw did not want to give Pocahontas to Argall; she was his sister-in-law. However, not
agreeing would have meant certain attack by a relentless Argall, an attack for which Japazaw's
people could offer no real defense. Japazaw finally chose the lesser of two evils and agreed to
Argall's plan, for the good of the tribe. To gain the Captain's sympathy and possible aid, Japazaw
said he feared retaliation from Wahunsenaca. Argall promised his protection and assured the
                                                                                                    5


chief that no harm would come to Pocahontas. Before agreeing, Japazaw made a further bargain
with Argall: the captain was to release Pocahontas soon after she was brought aboard ship.
Argall agreed. Japazaw's wife was sent to get Pocahontas. Once Pocahontas was aboard, Argall
broke his word and would not release her. Argall handed a copper kettle to Japazaw and his wife
for their "help" and as a way to implicate them in the betrayal.

Before Captain Argall sailed off with his captive, he had her husband Kocoum killed - luckily
their son was with another woman from the tribe. Argall then transported Pocahontas to
Jamestown; her father immediately returned the English prisoners and weapons to Jamestown to
pay her ransom. Pocahontas was not released and instead was put under the care of Sir Thomas
Gates, who supervised the ransom and negotiations. It had been four years since Pocahontas had
seen the English; she was now about fifteen or sixteen years old.


A devastating blow had been dealt to Wahunsenaca and he fell into a deep depression.
The quiakros advised retaliation. But, Wahunsenaca refused. Ingrained cultural guidelines
stressed peaceful solutions; besides he did not wish to risk Pocahontas being harmed. He felt
compelled to choose the path that best ensured his daughter's safety.

While in captivity, Pocahontas too became deeply depressed, but submitted to the will of her
captors. Being taken into captivity was not foreign, as it took place between tribes, as well.
Pocahontas would have known how to handle such a situation, to be cooperative. So she was
cooperative, for the good of her people, and as a means of survival. She was taught English
ways, especially the settlers' religious beliefs, by Reverend Alexander Whitaker at Henrico. Her
captors insisted her father did not love her and told her so continuously. Overwhelmed,
Pocahontas suffered a nervous breakdown, and the English asked that a sister of hers be sent to
care for her. Her sister Mattachanna, who was accompanied by her husband, was sent.
Pocahontas confided to Mattachanna that she had been raped and that she thought she was
pregnant. Hiding her pregnancy was the main reason Pocahontas was moved to Henrico after
only about three months at Jamestown. Pocahontas eventually gave birth to a son named
Thomas. His birthdate is not recorded, but the oral history states that she gave birth before she
married John Rolfe.


In the spring of 1614, the English continued to prove to Pocahontas that her father did not love
her. They staged an exchange of Pocahontas for her ransom payment (actually the second such
payment). During the exchange, a fight broke out and negotiations were terminated by both
sides. Pocahontas was told this "refusal" to pay her ransom proved her father loved English
weapons more than he loved her.

Shortly after the staged ransom exchange, Pocahontas converted to Christianity and was
renamed Rebecca. In April 1614, Pocahontas and John Rolfe were married at Jamestown.
Whether she truly converted is open to question, but she had little choice. She was a captive who
wanted to represent her people in the best light and to protect them. She probably married John
Rolfe willingly, since she already had a half-white child who could help create a bond between
the two peoples. Her father consented to the marriage, but only because she was being held
                                                                                               6


captive and he feared what might happen if he said no. John Rolfe married Pocahontas to gain
the help of the quiakros with his tobacco crops, as they were in charge of tobacco. With the
marriage, important kinship ties formed and the quiakros agreed to help Rolfe.


In 1616, the Rolfes and several Powhatan representatives, including Mattachanna and her
husband Uttamattamakin, were sent to England. Several of these representatives were
actually quiakros in disguise. By March 1617, the family was ready to return to Virginia after a
successful tour arranged to gain English interest in Jamestown. While on the ship Pocahontas
and her husband dined with Captain Argall. Shortly after, Pocahontas became very ill and began
convulsing. Mattachanna ran to get Rolfe for help. When they returned, Pocahontas was dead.
She was taken to Gravesend and buried in its church. Young Thomas was left behind to be raised
by relatives in England, while the rest of the party sailed back to Virginia.

Wahunsenaca was told by Mattachanna, Uttamattamakin and the disguised quiakros that his
daughter had been murdered. Poison was suspected as she had been in good health up until her
dinner on the ship. Wahunsenaca sank into despair at the loss of his beloved daughter, the
daughter he had sworn to his wife he would protect. Eventually, he was relieved as paramount
chief and, by April 1618, he was dead. The peace began to unravel and life in Tsenacomoco
would never be the same for the Powhatan people.




                                    Pocahontas statue at Historic Jamestowne.
Sarah J Stebbins
Conclusion

What little we know about Pocahontas covers only about half of her short life and yet has
inspired a myriad of books, poems, paintings, plays, sculptures, and films. It has captured the
imagination of people of all ages and backgrounds, scholars and non-scholars alike. The truth of
                                                                                                 7


Pocahontas' life is shrouded in interpretation of both the oral and written accounts, which can
contradict one another. One thing can be stated with certainty: her story has fascinated people for
more than four centuries and it still inspires people today. It will undoubtedly continue to do so.
She also still lives on through her own people, who are still here today, and through the
descendents of her two sons.

Author's note: There are various spellings for the names of people, places and tribes. In this
paper I have endeavored to use one spelling throughout, unless otherwise noted.


                                          Bibliography

Custalow, Dr. Linwood "Little Bear" and Angela L. Daniel "Silver Star." The True Story of
Pocahontas: The Other Side of History. Golden: Fulcrum Publishing, 2007.

Haile, Edward Wright (editor) Jamestown Narratives: Eyewitness Accounts of the Virginia
Colony: The First Decade: 1607-1617. Chaplain: Roundhouse, 1998.

Mossiker, Frances. Pocahontas: The Life and The Legend. New York: Da Capo Press, 1976.

Rountree, Helen C. and E. Randolph Turner III. Before and After Jamestown: Virginia's
Powhatans and Their Predecessors. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1989.

Rountree, Helen C. Pocahontas, Powhatan, Opechancanough: Three Indian Lives Changed by
Jamestown. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2005.

Rountree, Helen C. The Powhatan Indians of Virginia: Their Traditional Culture. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1989.

Towsned, Camilla. Pocahontas and the Powhatan Dilemma: The American Portrait Series. New
York: Hill And Wang, 2004.

Sarah J Stebbins NPS Seasonal, August 2010

Available online through the National Park Service is A Study of Virginia Indians and
Jamestown: THE FIRST CENTURY by Danielle Moretti-Langholtz, Ph.D.
